README_DNS_setup.rst, before:

==================================
 DNS Privacy Evaluation and Setup
==================================

Your overall online privacy "profile" is highly dependent on where your
DNS requests go.  Typically your initial DNS server address is provided
by your local router (or other DHCP server) which is a private IP address,
however, the router simply forwards the requests to another DNS server
configured in the router (typically your ISP provides these addresses).

The upshot of the above is your implicit trust in the humans who operate
those DNS servers, yet you have no idea how much data they log or where
it goes.  But it gets worse, since (legacy) DNS is plain-text and easily
intercepted by anyone on the network.  Sure you can try a commercial VPN
provider or configure your system to use one of Google's public DNS servers,
but plain-text DNS is a `well-documented`_ tracking and data collection
method.

.. _well-documented: README_DNS_privacy.rst


In order to rectify the problem you'll need to collect some system info:

* what tools own/manage your network config?
* what tools own/manage your DNS config?

For Ubuntu bionic and focal, the answer is most likely one or more of
the following.

Net config:

* netplan
* cloud-init
* NetworkManager
* connman

DNS config:

* DHCP/netplan
* systemd-resolved
* NetworkManager
* connman

For Gentoo the answer is similar.

* netifrc/DHCP and openrc
* systemd-resolved
* NetworkManager
* connman


Ubuntu configuration
--------------------

Underneath everything you most likely have a netplan configuration file
(which is auto-generated by cloud-init on the "official" Ubuntu cloud
image and rootfs builds).

To find out, open a terminal and issue the following command::

  $ ls /etc/netplan/
  01-network-manager-all.yaml

The answer above is from the Ubuntu Mate rpi image.  Now ``cat`` the file::

  $ cat /etc/netplan/01-network-manager-all.yaml
  # Let NetworkManager manage all devices on this system
  network:
    version: 2
    renderer: NetworkManager

The above shows netplan does an immediate handoff to NetworkManager (which
will use either an external or internal DHCP client to handle the network
configuration).

Now we can look at the DNS configuration, mainly your ``/etc/resolv.conf``
file.  This can be ether a file or a symlink (if the latter, it will show
who is currently managing your DNS servers).

  $ ls -l /etc/resolv.conf
  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 32 Sep  4 21:54 /etc/resolv.conf -> /run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf

The above shows systemd-resolved is operating as your local DNS stub
resolver, where "stub resolver" means it is 1) local to your device only,
and 2) non-recursive.

To see what DNS servers are used for name resolution, issue the following
command in a terminal::

  $ systemd-resolve --status
  Global
            DNSSEC NTA: 10.in-addr.arpa
                        16.172.in-addr.arpa
                        168.192.in-addr.arpa
                        17.172.in-addr.arpa
                        18.172.in-addr.arpa
                        19.172.in-addr.arpa
                        20.172.in-addr.arpa
                        21.172.in-addr.arpa
                        22.172.in-addr.arpa
                        23.172.in-addr.arpa
                        24.172.in-addr.arpa
                        25.172.in-addr.arpa
                        26.172.in-addr.arpa
                        27.172.in-addr.arpa
                        28.172.in-addr.arpa
                        29.172.in-addr.arpa
                        30.172.in-addr.arpa
                        31.172.in-addr.arpa
                        corp
                        d.f.ip6.arpa
                        home
                        internal
                        intranet
                        lan
                        local
                        private
                        test

  Link 3 (enx84e714006ef7)
        Current Scopes: DNS
         LLMNR setting: yes
  MulticastDNS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no
           DNS Servers: 192.168.1.1
            DNS Domain: local.domain

  Link 2 (wlan0)
        Current Scopes: none
         LLMNR setting: yes
  MulticastDNS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no


What can we learn from the above output?

1. There are no global nameservers configured (if so, they would appear
   near the top)
2. The ethernet interface has one local nameserver
3. The wifi interface is currently not configured

Now we can look at the DNS server address(es) your system is actually
using by checking the contents of ``resolv.conf``.  In your terminal,
cat the file::

  $ cat /etc/resolv.conf
  # This file is managed by man:systemd-resolved(8). Do not edit.
  #
  (more comments)
  nameserver 127.0.0.53
  options edns0
  search local.domain

The above shows systemd is indeed "managing" the contents and will wipe
any changes if edited directly, and we also need to make sure NetworkManager
isn't going to do the same thing.

Reconfigure your ethernet device (optional)
-------------------------------------------

If your netplan config file above shows ``renderer: NetworkManager`` and
you want to change it, you can make it "unmanaged" by NetworkManager.

The following netplan config will make NetworkManager stop managing your
(wired) ethernet config::

  network:
    ethernets:
      eth0:
        dhcp4: true
        optional: true
    version: 2

Be careful not to change the indenting in ``yaml`` config files (any file
ending in ``.yml`` or ``.yaml``).

If your ethernet interface has a different name, substitute that name in
the config above.  Check your network interfaces using the ``ifconfig`` or
``ip addr show`` commands.

Since we'd like to use only the secure DNS servers *you* choose, we need
to tell systemd-resolved it no longer owns (or manages) ``resolv.conf``,
and the way we do that is by removing the symlink and creating a file
in its place.  But first we need to install a dnscrpyt-enabled resolver;
for this example we use the getdnsapi stub resolver (aka stubby).


Tell NetworkManager not to change global nameservers
----------------------------------------------------

By default NetworkManager will avoid making DNS server changes if-and-only-if
it detects ``/etc/resolv.conf`` is a symlink to one of the systemd-resolved
files.  If it sees ``/etc/resolv.conf`` is an actual file it will start
"managing" it (ie, overwrite any changes you make to it).  In order to stop
that behavior, you'll need to change the ``NetworkManager.conf`` by adding
``dns=none`` to the ``[main]`` section of the config file.  Run::

  $ sudo nano /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf

and change the following::

  [main]
  plugins=ifupdown,keyfile
  dns=none                  <==  add or edit this line

  [ifupdown]
  managed=false

  [device]
  wifi.scan-rand-mac-address=no

Then save and exit the file and restart NetworkManager::

  $ sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager.service


Install a secure DNS resolver
-----------------------------

One available/working example is the getdns resolver, stubby; use the
appropriate package manager to install the package for your distro:

* Gentoo - ``sudo USE="stubby" emerge net-dns/getdns``
* Ubuntu - ``sudo apt-get install stubby``

Then view the config file::

  $ less /etc/stubby/stubby.yml

The default settings should work fine out-of-the-box, however, you should
review the default DNS providers in the un-commented portions under the
``upstream_recursive_servers`` section of the file.  The ``fpnd`` package
also installs some example config files, including an example ``stubby.yml``
with some alternate dns providers (note this is only the provider section
and not a complete config file).

By default stubby will only listen for DNS requests on the loopback interface
on port ``53``, ie, ``127.0.0.1:53`` so you'll need to set this in your new
``resolv.conf`` file.

To verify your changes, you will need the ``dig`` command, so if you
don't have it already, then you should install it with the following::

* Gentoo - ``sudo emerge net-dns/bind-tools``
* Ubuntu - ``sudo apt-get install bind9utils``


Set resolv.conf for stubby
--------------------------

Now you can remove the symlink and set your new resolver address in the
(new) ``resolv.conf`` file::

  $ sudo rm /etc/resolv.conf

then run::

  $ sudo nano /etc/resolv.conf

and add the following content to the new file::

  # use stubby as secure local resolver
  nameserver 127.0.0.1

and finally, restart the relevant services::

  $ sudo systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service
  $ sudo systemctl restart stubby.service

then check your new config::

  $ systemd-resolve --status

  Global
         LLMNR setting: no
  MulticastDNS setting: no
    DNSOverTLS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no
    Current DNS Server: 127.0.0.1
           DNS Servers: 127.0.0.1
            DNSSEC NTA: 10.in-addr.arpa
                        16.172.in-addr.arpa
  (more output suppressed)

and try to resolve something::

  $ dig www.gentoo.org

  ; <<>> DiG 9.16.1-Ubuntu <<>> www.gentoo.org
  ;; global options: +cmd
  ;; Got answer:
  ;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 20166
  ;; flags: qr rd ra ad; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 5

  ;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
  ; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
  ;; QUESTION SECTION:
  ;www.gentoo.org.                        IN      A

  ;; ANSWER SECTION:
  www.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      CNAME   www-bytemark-v4v6.gentoo.org.
  www-bytemark-v4v6.gentoo.org. 43200 IN  A       89.16.167.134

  ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
  gentoo.org.             86399   IN      NS      ns3.gentoo.org.
  gentoo.org.             86399   IN      NS      ns1.gentoo.org.

  ;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
  ns1.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      AAAA    2001:470:ea4a:1:225:90ff:fe02:16e5
  ns3.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      AAAA    2001:470:1f06:a91::2
  ns1.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      A       140.211.166.189
  ns3.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      A       208.116.51.2

  ;; Query time: 935 msec
  ;; SERVER: 127.0.0.1#53(127.0.0.1)
  ;; WHEN: Mon Sep 21 00:01:19 UTC 2020
  ;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 363


Two interesting things to note about the above:

* the ``flags`` line near the top should include ``ad`` when the server
  supports DNSSEC
* the ``SERVER`` line near the bottom should show the default address
  for your shiny new secure DNS resolver

Commit message:

fix route check so it doesn't leak before the routes are configured
* examples: add dnsmasq cfg, update stubby resolver list
* fix rules (allow encrypted DNS), update doc

Signed-off-by: Stephen Arnold <nerdboy@gentoo.org>

README_DNS_setup.rst, after:

==================================
 DNS Privacy Evaluation and Setup
==================================

Your overall online privacy "profile" is highly dependent on where your
DNS requests go.  Typically your initial DNS server address is provided
by your local router (or other DHCP server) which is a private IP address,
however, the router simply forwards the requests to another DNS server
configured in the router (typically your ISP provides these addresses).

Before making any changes, you can test your current settings with the
following URLs:

* https://dnsleaktest.com/

The upshot of the above is your implicit trust in the humans who operate
those DNS servers, yet you have no idea how much data they log or where
it goes.  But it gets worse, since (legacy) DNS is plain-text and easily
intercepted by anyone on the network.  Sure you can try a commercial VPN
provider or configure your system to use one of Google's public DNS servers,
but plain-text DNS is a `well-documented`_ tracking and data collection
method.

.. _well-documented: README_DNS_privacy.rst


In order to rectify the problem you'll need to collect some system info:

* what tools own/manage your network config?
* what tools own/manage your DNS config?

For Ubuntu bionic and focal, the answer is most likely one or more of
the following.

Net config:

* netplan
* cloud-init
* NetworkManager
* connman

DNS config:

* DHCP/netplan
* systemd-resolved
* NetworkManager
* connman

For Gentoo the answer is similar.

* netifrc/DHCP and openrc
* systemd-resolved
* NetworkManager
* connman


Ubuntu configuration
--------------------

Underneath everything you most likely have a netplan configuration file
(which is auto-generated by cloud-init on the "official" Ubuntu cloud
image and rootfs builds).

To find out, open a terminal and issue the following command::

  $ ls /etc/netplan/
  01-network-manager-all.yaml

The answer above is from the Ubuntu Mate rpi image.  Now ``cat`` the file::

  $ cat /etc/netplan/01-network-manager-all.yaml
  # Let NetworkManager manage all devices on this system
  network:
    version: 2
    renderer: NetworkManager

The above shows netplan does an immediate handoff to NetworkManager (which
will use either an external or internal DHCP client to handle the network
configuration).

Now we can look at the DNS configuration, mainly your ``/etc/resolv.conf``
file.  This can be ether a file or a symlink (if the latter, it will show
who is currently managing your DNS servers).

  $ ls -l /etc/resolv.conf
  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 32 Sep  4 21:54 /etc/resolv.conf -> /run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf

The above shows systemd-resolved is operating as your local DNS stub
resolver, where "stub resolver" means it is 1) local to your device only,
and 2) non-recursive.

To see what DNS servers are used for name resolution, issue the following
command in a terminal::

  $ systemd-resolve --status
  Global
            DNSSEC NTA: 10.in-addr.arpa
                        16.172.in-addr.arpa
                        168.192.in-addr.arpa
                        17.172.in-addr.arpa
                        18.172.in-addr.arpa
                        19.172.in-addr.arpa
                        20.172.in-addr.arpa
                        21.172.in-addr.arpa
                        22.172.in-addr.arpa
                        23.172.in-addr.arpa
                        24.172.in-addr.arpa
                        25.172.in-addr.arpa
                        26.172.in-addr.arpa
                        27.172.in-addr.arpa
                        28.172.in-addr.arpa
                        29.172.in-addr.arpa
                        30.172.in-addr.arpa
                        31.172.in-addr.arpa
                        corp
                        d.f.ip6.arpa
                        home
                        internal
                        intranet
                        lan
                        local
                        private
                        test

  Link 3 (enx84e714006ef7)
        Current Scopes: DNS
         LLMNR setting: yes
  MulticastDNS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no
           DNS Servers: 192.168.1.1
            DNS Domain: local.domain

  Link 2 (wlan0)
        Current Scopes: none
         LLMNR setting: yes
  MulticastDNS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no


What can we learn from the above output?

1. There are no global nameservers configured (if so, they would appear
   near the top)
2. The ethernet interface has one local nameserver
3. The wifi interface is currently not configured

Now we can look at the DNS server address(es) your system is actually
using by checking the contents of ``resolv.conf``.  In your terminal,
cat the file::

  $ cat /etc/resolv.conf
  # This file is managed by man:systemd-resolved(8). Do not edit.
  #
  (more comments)
  nameserver 127.0.0.53
  options edns0
  search local.domain

The above shows systemd is indeed "managing" the contents and will wipe
any changes if edited directly, and we also need to make sure NetworkManager
isn't going to do the same thing.

Reconfigure your ethernet device (optional)
-------------------------------------------

If your netplan config file above shows ``renderer: NetworkManager`` and
you want to change it, you can make it "unmanaged" by NetworkManager.

The following netplan config will make NetworkManager stop managing your
(wired) ethernet config::

  network:
    ethernets:
      eth0:
        dhcp4: true
        optional: true
    version: 2

Be careful not to change the indenting in ``yaml`` config files (any file
ending in ``.yml`` or ``.yaml``).

If your ethernet interface has a different name, substitute that name in
the config above.  Check your network interfaces using the ``ifconfig`` or
``ip addr show`` commands.

Since we'd like to use only the secure DNS servers *you* choose, we need
to tell systemd-resolved it no longer owns (or manages) ``resolv.conf``,
and the way we do that is by removing the symlink and creating a file
in its place.  But first we need to install a dnscrpyt-enabled resolver;
for this example we use the getdnsapi stub resolver (aka stubby).


Tell NetworkManager not to change global nameservers
----------------------------------------------------

By default NetworkManager will avoid making DNS server changes if-and-only-if
it detects ``/etc/resolv.conf`` is a symlink to one of the systemd-resolved
files.  If it sees ``/etc/resolv.conf`` is an actual file it will start
"managing" it (ie, overwrite any changes you make to it).  In order to stop
that behavior, you'll need to change the ``NetworkManager.conf`` by adding
``dns=none`` to the ``[main]`` section of the config file.  Run::

  $ sudo nano /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf

and change the following::

  [main]
  plugins=ifupdown,keyfile
  dns=none                  <==  add or edit this line

  [ifupdown]
  managed=false

  [device]
  wifi.scan-rand-mac-address=no

Then save and exit the file and restart NetworkManager::

  $ sudo systemctl restart NetworkManager.service


Install a secure DNS resolver
-----------------------------

One available/working example is the getdns resolver, stubby; use the
appropriate package manager to install the package for your distro:

* Gentoo - ``sudo USE="stubby" emerge net-dns/getdns``
* Ubuntu - ``sudo apt-get install stubby``

Then view the config file::

  $ less /etc/stubby/stubby.yml

The default settings should work fine out-of-the-box, however, you should
review the default DNS providers in the un-commented portions under the
``upstream_recursive_servers`` section of the file.  The ``fpnd`` package
also installs some example config files, including an example ``stubby.yml``
with some alternate dns providers (note this is only the provider section
and not a complete config file).

By default stubby will only listen for DNS requests on the loopback interface
on port ``53``, ie, ``127.0.0.1:53`` so you'll need to set this in your new
``resolv.conf`` file.

To verify your changes, you will need the ``dig`` command, so if you
don't have it already, then you should install it with the following::

* Gentoo - ``sudo emerge net-dns/bind-tools``
* Ubuntu - ``sudo apt-get install bind9utils``


Set resolv.conf for stubby
--------------------------

Now you can remove the symlink and set your new resolver address in the
(new) ``resolv.conf`` file::

  $ sudo rm /etc/resolv.conf

then run::

  $ sudo nano /etc/resolv.conf

and add the following content to the new file::

  # use stubby as secure local resolver
  nameserver 127.0.0.1

and finally, restart the relevant services::

  $ sudo systemctl restart systemd-resolved.service
  $ sudo systemctl restart stubby.service

then check your new config::

  $ systemd-resolve --status

  Global
         LLMNR setting: no
  MulticastDNS setting: no
    DNSOverTLS setting: no
        DNSSEC setting: no
      DNSSEC supported: no
    Current DNS Server: 127.0.0.1
           DNS Servers: 127.0.0.1
            DNSSEC NTA: 10.in-addr.arpa
                        16.172.in-addr.arpa
  (more output suppressed)

and try to resolve something::

  $ dig www.gentoo.org

  ; <<>> DiG 9.16.1-Ubuntu <<>> www.gentoo.org
  ;; global options: +cmd
  ;; Got answer:
  ;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 20166
  ;; flags: qr rd ra ad; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 5

  ;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
  ; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
  ;; QUESTION SECTION:
  ;www.gentoo.org.                        IN      A

  ;; ANSWER SECTION:
  www.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      CNAME   www-bytemark-v4v6.gentoo.org.
  www-bytemark-v4v6.gentoo.org. 43200 IN  A       89.16.167.134

  ;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
  gentoo.org.             86399   IN      NS      ns3.gentoo.org.
  gentoo.org.             86399   IN      NS      ns1.gentoo.org.

  ;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
  ns1.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      AAAA    2001:470:ea4a:1:225:90ff:fe02:16e5
  ns3.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      AAAA    2001:470:1f06:a91::2
  ns1.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      A       140.211.166.189
  ns3.gentoo.org.         43199   IN      A       208.116.51.2

  ;; Query time: 935 msec
  ;; SERVER: 127.0.0.1#53(127.0.0.1)
  ;; WHEN: Mon Sep 21 00:01:19 UTC 2020
  ;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 363


Two interesting things to note about the above:

* the ``flags`` line near the top should include ``ad`` when the server
  supports DNSSEC
* the ``SERVER`` line near the bottom should show the default address
  for your shiny new secure DNS resolver
